Trinity College Cambridge MS 
pp.13-29
We are favoured this evening with the first sight of the restoration of a remarkable monument found by Mr Fellows at Xanthus in Lycia, asia minor, drawn very exactly by Mr Rhode Hawkins who accompanied that remarkable expedition; the result of which is so honorable to those gentlemen and to our government (which have furnished the means of transporting these marbles to our museum) and so highly valuable to art and the history of Grecian art in particular.  You are in the enjoyment of the first exhibition in this country of this interesting monument and whether considered historically, with reference to sculpture or architecture, it must be regarded as one of the most interesting of the ancient world.
        And if next to the habitation of the living, the habitations of the dead are interesting to us who have to boast of the most illustrious… to record by monuments their virtues and example, this monument of the brave Lycians who perished in the defence of their country is greatly affecting as we shall see in the history recorded by Herodotus.  And we shall see that none would better deserve from this fall… conquerors such a memorial of their valor and patriotism.
        It must also be remembered that Xanthus was the capital of Lycia of the country of Sarpedon [verso] whose death is so fairly described by Homer.  The Lycians were a noble race proud of that early … which Homer records.  Xanthus is full of remains which fully attest that early superiority of the ...’s nature in a style of art altogether new and remarkable, many valuable specimens of which are now in our museum brought by that expedition.  And though this particular monument is the work of their enemies the Greeks we discern in its sculptures many explanatory details of the Lycian people of which this is not the place to speak.  And we are to remember than being by every reasonable presumption sacked by these conquerors 546 BC, 106 years before the last Parthenon was built, we have an example  of architecture proportion in every way important and interesting to us.  Mr Rhode Hawkins has favoured me with the following description.  [Then asterisk to the letter]


p.29:
The architectural remarks I have to make are these.
In the general aspect we have the Greek idea of the cenotaph or mausoleum of which an example obviously of much later date exists at Mylasa [?] a city at no great distance.  From this we may gather some more accurate notion of the celebrated tomb of Mausoleus the mausoleum - one of the wonders of the world.  The surrounding the base or Podium with sculpture is remarkable as is the whole of the order of Ionic proportions surmounting the cella- which plainly ex... the progenitor and original of the Erechtheum.  The interval is aerostyle and agrees therefore with all the Evidence of history that the eustyle and peinostyle were of subsequent invention as suggested in our discussions on the temple of the capitol.
        The entablature is remarkable, the architrave and frieze being incorporated into one, in order to give due size to the sculpture.  the dentil course is heavy as always in the ionian remains.  the roof is covered with Parian tiles which with the cymatium which always formed the end tiles are large in proportion and very remarkable.  
        We shall hope to see all these details published [verso] by the trustees of the B. Museum and none can better deserve that care than these precious monuments more than 2390 years old.
